We all use music players like Windows Media Player or VLC to play music on our system. Have you ever wanted to create your own music player if your answer is yes then with Python, you can build a customized Music Player. In this article, you will see how to build a simple yet functional music player using two powerful Python libraries: Tkinter and Pygame. Tkinter will help us create the graphical user interface (GUI), while Pygame will handle the music playback. Even if you have never used Python before and you know nothing about it, no need to worry. as this article will guide you through each step one by one, and by the end, you'll have a music player that can load, play, pause, and navigate through the playlist of your favorite songs. So, let's dive in and start making some music!



Music Player with Tkinter and Pygame in Python
Here, for creating the Music Player App Using Python follow the below steps



Create the Virtual Environment

using the below command create virtual environment

python -m venv env 
.\env\Scripts\activate.ps1

Install Nesseaccary Libraries
To install the required libraries, Tkinter and Pygame, use the following commands:

pip install tk
pip install pygame
pip install requests


These commands will install the necessary dependencies for utilizing Tkinter and Pygame in your Python environment



Code Implementation
app.py: This Python code creates a simple music player using Tkinter and Pygame. Tkinter helps make the buttons and lists you see on the screen, while Pygame plays the music.

First, the app sets up a window with a title, size, and icon. Then, Pygame is initialized to handle playing music and to check when a song finishes. A menu is added to the window, letting you pick a folder that contains your music files. This way, you can load all your songs into the player. Some global variables keep track of your playlist, the current song playing, and whether the music is paused. The app has different functions to handle various tasks:

load_music(): Opens a dialog for you to choose a folder and loads all MP3 songs from that folder into the playlist.
play_music(): Plays the song you select or resumes playing if the music was paused.
pause_music(): Pauses the song that is currently playing.
next_song(): Plays the next song in the playlist.
previous_song(): Plays the previous song in the playlist.
check_music_end(): Automatically plays the next song when the current one finishes.
The app's interface includes a list that shows all the songs in your playlist and buttons to play, pause, go to the next song, or go to the previous song. When you select a song from the list, it starts playing. The app also keeps checking if a song has ended to play the next one automatically.

This code makes a straightforward music player that lets you easily manage and listen to your favorite songs....



Conclusion


In conclusion, the Music Player App created using Python combines the Tkinter and Pygame libraries to offer a straightforward and user-friendly interface for playing music files. This app allows users to load a folder of MP3 songs, play, pause, and navigate through their music collection effortlessly. By integrating Pygame for audio playback and Tkinter for the graphical interface, the app provides a simple yet effective solution for music enthusiasts. The ability to select songs from a list, along with intuitive control buttons, ensures an enjoyable listening experience. This Music Player App is a practical and accessible tool for anyone looking to manage and enjoy their music library with ease.